The Problem of Philosophical Foundations in Light of a Transcendental Pragmatics of Language

Karl-Otto Apel

The Problem: Critical Rationalism Versus Foundationalism
A Critical Reconstruction of the Münchhausen Trilemma
Does the Principle of Fallibilism Contradict the Presupposition of Indubitable Evidence?
Philosophical Foundations via Transcendental-Pragmatic Reflection on the Conditions of Possibility of the Intersubjective Validity of Philosophical Argumentation
1. The Problem: Critical Rationalism Versus Foundationalism

The argument that it is impossible for philosophy to have foundations has been put forward recently by the “critical rationalism” that developed out of Karl Popper's The Logic of Scientific Discovery, in particular by W. W. Bartley and Hans Albert.  This claim is made in opposition to both classical modern rationalism and Kant's transcendental critique of knowledge.1   “Critical rationalism” combines this distancing from an uncritical rationalism—that is, from a rationalism that has not reflected critically on the impossibility of self-validating reasons—with the claim that the philosophical program of foundationalism might be superseded by the alternative program of unlimited rational criticism, if the latter were given a satisfactory form.  Following upon Bartley's proclamation of a “pancritical rationalism” in his Retreat from Commitment,2 Hans Albert has attempted to work out this alternative program in his Treatise on Critical Reason.  Through the derivation of what he calls the Münchhausen Trilemma,3 the criticism of any claim to philosophical foundations is given an impressive and, apparently, logically compelling form.

According to Albert, every attempt to make good the claim to provide philosophical foundations in the sense of Leibniz's principle of sufficient reason leads “to a situation with three alternatives, all of which appear unacceptable; that is, it leads to a trilemma.”  The trilemma forces one to choose between the following alternatives:

(1) an infinite regress that appears to be required by the necessity of always going further back in the search for reasons, but that is not practically feasible and therefore yields no solid foundation;

(2) a logical circle in the deduction that results from the fact that in the process of giving reasons one has to resort to statements that have already shown themselves to be in need of justification—a process that, because it is logically faulty, likewise leads to no firm foundation;

(3) breaking off giving reasons at a particular point, which, while in principle feasible, would involve an arbitrary suspension of the principle of sufficient reason.4

Albert knows, of course, that the philosophical tradition since Aristotle—in particular the rationalism begun by Descartes, as well as its opposite number, empiricism—did not want to suspend giving reasons at an arbitrary point by suspending the principle of providing justification through reasons.  Rather, that tradition sought premises that, on the basis of epistemic evidence, would be illuminating or convincing.5  Albert argues, however, that every such premise “can be fundamentally doubted,”6 so that any justification given by means of epistemic “evidence” merely amounts to an arbitrary breaking off of the process of giving reasons in the sense of the third alternative of the trilemma.

We can find many passages that illustrate this interpretation of Albert's position.  According to Albert, the appeal to “evidence” in giving reasons is “entirely analogous to the suspension of the causal principle through the introduction of a causa sui.” “An assertion whose truth is certain and, therefore, not in need of justification” is, according to Albert, “a dogma.” Breaking off giving reasons in the sense of the third alternative is, therefore, “justification by appeal to a dogma.”  Likewise, “going back to extralinguistic stages of the process” changes nothing, since “it is always possible to ask for the justification of these stages themselves.”  “Any conception of self-validating reasons for such fundamental stages, as well as the corresponding claim that there are such propositions, must be viewed as a disguise for the decision to suspend the principle of sufficient reason in this case.”7

Thus Albert not only rejects the Cartesian reduction of the validity of truth claims to epistemic evidence or certainty, but goes so far as to argue that the quest for certainty is entirely worthless; indeed, it is said to be irreconcilable with the search for truth: “All guarantees in knowledge are self-fabricated and thus worthless for comprehending reality.  That is, we can always create certainty by turning this or that element of our convictions into a dogma and thus immunizing it from all possible criticism.  Thus, it becomes impossible for it to fail.”8  Albert sees this criticism as confirmed by Hugo Dingler, who no longer finds the final “certainties” for epistemic justification in philosophy in the givenness of evidence, but rather in a “will” to certainty.  Through the “exhaustion” principle he immunizes theoretical construction from possible failure to grasp reality.  Here, Albert argues, the “will to certainty” triumphs over the “will to knowledge” and thus amounts to a reductio ad absurdum of the principle of philosophical foundations in classical rationalism.  “The development of the classical doctrine has made it clear that the quest for certainty and the search for truth are mutually exclusive, if one does not want to restrict oneself to contentless truths” (in the sense of merely analytic truths).9

In light of this difficulty, Albert, following Popper, proposes that we give up the principle of sufficient reason, or philosophical foundations in general, and replace it by a decision that is not rationally justifiable—but in precisely the opposite sense from Dingler, that is to say, a decision for a method that does not regard any knowledge as certain and exempt from criticism.  This method requires that “reality be given the opportunity to determine” whether or not our theoretical constructions can fail to grasp it.  Such a decision in favor of Popper's principle of “fallibilism” must, according to Albert, “sacrifice the desire for certainty that underlies the classical doctrine and accept permanent uncertainty as to whether our opinions will be confirmed and supported in the future.”10

Albert clearly admits that Popper's adoption of the method of critical testing, no less than Dingler's “will to certainty,” involves a “moral decision”: “it amounts to accepting a methodical practice for social life that has enormous consequences; it is a practice that is not only of great significance for the construction of theories, but also for their application and thus for the role played by knowledge in social life.”  Indeed, “the rational model of criticism is the scheme of a way of life, of a social practice, and has, therefore, ethical as well as political significance.”11  Albert draws these conclusion for ethics in section 12 (“Criticism and Ethics”) of his Treatise.  He also agrees with Popper that a rational philosophical foundation for ethical norms is impossible.  He recommends instead that both existing moral systems and scientific theories be continually reexamined to see if they continue to be confirmed and stand up to alternative systems and theories.12

In what follows, I wish to submit “critical rationalism” to a metacritical examination—that is, an examination that, to begin with, will rely on nothing more than applying the method of critical rationalism to itself.  From what has been said, it should already be apparent that my purpose cannot be to question the principle of “critical testing.”  (Who today, after all, would want to criticize “critical rationalism” in this sense?)  Instead I would like to inquire into the conditions of the possibility of intersubjectively valid criticism—of the “critical testing” of scientific knowledge and moral norms.  This approach, stemming from Kant, will enable me to call into question Albert's view that the denial of the possibility of philosophical foundations is connected to the positive program of “rational criticism.”  More specifically, I shall investigate whether—and if so, in what sense—the principle of foundations or justifying reasons can be replaced by the principle of criticism, or whether—and if so, in what sense—some type of philosophical foundation is not itself presupposed by the principle of intersubjectively valid criticism.

 2. A Critical Reconstruction of the Münchhausen Trilemma

What does philosophical tradition really say about the problem of foundations?  The problem has arisen repeatedly, ever since antiquity, in connection with the impossibility of a logico-mathematical (apodictic-deductive) derivation of the fundamental principles, or “axioms,” of logico-mathematical thought and, thereby, of all the demonstrative sciences.13  Put bluntly: ever since the time of Aristotle, the problem of foundations has been made a problem of philosophical significance precisely through the fact that logico-mathematical arguments can justify neither the truth of their own premises nor the validity of their rules of proof, but rather can only check “the transfer of the positive truth value, truth, from the set of premises to the conclusion and, in the opposite direction, the transfer of the negative truth value, falsehood, from the conclusion to the set of premises.”14  Since Descartes, the Aristotelian comprehension of axioms as intuited fundamental principles that are neither provable nor in need of proof15 has been radicalized by taking evidence (or evidentness) as the requirement of philosophical foundations.16  It is already clear that as long as the problem of philosophical foundations is conceived in traditional terms, it cannot be a matter of formal logic.

Albert at first seems to recognize this.  For he does not understand Leibniz's “principle of sufficient reason” as it was understood in older logic textbooks, that is, as the most fundamental principle of thought, as an “axiom of logic.”  Rather, it becomes a “general postulate of the classical methodology of rational thought”: it is understood as a “methodological principle” which presupposes that “the intelligibility of reality is connected with the determinateness of truth.”17  (As a matter of fact, the foundationalism of classical modern rationalism corresponds, in my opinion, to a subordination of logic—and of the ontological correspondence theory of truth—to the quest for evidence; epistemology is given the status of prima philosophia.  This subordination of logic and ontology to evidence as the basic principle of the theory of knowledge is expressed most radically in the phenomenology of consciousness developed by Brentano and Husserl.)

In his treatment of the Münchhausen trilemma, however, Albert starts from the point of view of modern logic, invoking the authority of Popper and Carnap.18  He gives the impression that he could explain the aporias of the rationalist postulate of philosophical foundations by a trilemma derived by formal logic alone, that is, by a trilemma that is in fact derived only on the condition that philosophical foundations be purely deductive.  This condition leads to the alternatives: (1) infinite regress, (2) logical circle, and (3) ungrounded breaking off of the process of giving reasons.19

Now, whatever Albert's intention may have been, a critical reconstruction of his argument against classical rationalism must, in my opinion, make the following clear: no argument against the evidence postulate of classical rationalism is directly connected with the third alternative of the trilemma as derived by formal logical means.  Rather, the trilemma can itself be understood as an explication of the problematic of axioms that Aristotle pointed out and that raised the problem of philosophical foundations in the first place.  (If, with David Hilbert, we reduce the problem of the truth of the axioms of logic and mathematics to the problem of the absence of contradictions in “axiomatic systems,” there results—corresponding to the Münchhausen trilemma—a metalogical or metamathematical aporia of the philosophical foundations of deduction itself, as Cadel, Church, and others have shown.)20  Already this much is clear: unlike the logico-mathematical (and metalogical and metamathematical) problem of philosophical foundations, the modern principle of sufficient reason, as far as it requires an appeal to evidence, is from the start an epistemological principle—a principle that, to put it in a modern idiom, involves the pragmatic dimension of evidence for a knowing subject.

In our context this means that it would be legitimate to trace the aporia of philosophical foundations back to the third horn of the Münchhausen trilemma only if it could be proven that making evidence into a postulate is completely meaningless that it, in effect, implies the replacement of the search for truth by an arbitrary decision.  However, the required demonstration of the pointlessness of the evidence postulate cannot, in principle, be accomplished by formal logical means alone.  How then can the demonstration be accomplished?  Must not such a demonstration itself assume paradoxically that appeal to “evidence” is not an arbitrary decision, but rather indispensable to philosophical argumentation?

In order to avoid misunderstandings, I shall at this point make clear the strategy of my argumentation.  In what follows I by no means wish to defend the position of classical rationalism that—in the sense of the Cartesian primacy of the theory of knowledge as a theory of consciousness—reduces the search for truth to the search for evidence.  I do not, therefore, want to defend an empiricist or rationalist “philosophy of ultimate origins,”21 a theory of knowledge that is supposed to be “a solution of the problem of origins and of validity all at once.”22  Such a strategy seems to me unpromising because epistemic evidence as such, however indispensable, is restricted to the evidential consciousness that has it.  Traditional theory of knowledge, qua theory of consciousness, cannot show from its own conceptual resources how epistemic evidence—that is, the evidence accompanying judgments regarding conceptual syntheses of the ideas in some individual consciousness—can be carried over to the intersubjective validity of linguistically formulated statements.  The goal of Popper and his followers, viz., intersubjectively valid statements, seems to me to be the proper methodological aim of the scientific-philosophical search for truth.23  I completely agree with Popper and Albert that the “evidence” of convictions for a particular consciousness is not sufficient for the truth of statements.  Beyond this, however, and quite contrary to Popper and his school, I shall argue that the fact that only the critical discourse of scientists can decide the intersubjective validity of scientific results has consequences for the theory of truth.  In my opinion, the customary move in logical empiricism by which the linguistically mediated problematic of the intersubjective validity of statements is reduced to a (syntactic-semantical) logic of science, and the problems of traditional theory of knowledge are banished into psychology, just misunderstands the problem.

Albert seems to be of the same opinion, since in his discussion of the character of critical methodology he rightly rejects the reduction of the theory of science to an “application (or even a part) of formal logic, including the relevant elements of mathematics, even, in the best case, including elements of the semantics of artificial languages.”24  In light of “the contemporary distinction between syntax, semantics, and pragmatics,” Albert calls for a consideration of “the epistemological relevance of pragmatics”25—of the linguistic and extralinguistic states of affairs that constitute the context of problematic statements.  The pragmatic context includes, according to Albert, “those states of affairs which are the referents of the statements about them” and also “those states of affairs which make up the context of human epistemic activities—that is, not only the isolated activities of reflection and observation by single individuals, but also critical discussion as a model of social interaction and those institutions that support or weaken, encourage or discourage, critical discussion.”26  With good reason Albert draws the conclusion that his “criticism of the classical theory of knowledge” and the necessity, which he derives from this criticism, for a “choice between the principle of sufficient reason and the principle of critical examination” are matters that are to be dealt with “under the rubric of pragmatics.”27

I would like not only to support this evaluation of the problem but moreover to take it seriously, since I understand the pragmatic conditions of the possibility of scientific knowledge, at least in part, as Kant did: as conditions of the possibility of intersubjectively valid knowledge and (scientific and philosophical) critique of knowledge—quite unlike Carnap and Hempel, who understood pragmatic conditions merely as the empirical sociological or psychological contexts irrelevant to the validity of knowledge.  My assessment of pragmatics must be correct at least to the extent that the conflict, which occurs in “pragmatic realism,” “between the principle of sufficient reason and the principle of critical examination”—whether or not it implies a decision between alternatives—is concerned with the conditions of the validity of scientific knowledge.  I would like therefore to propose, as the philosophical extension of logical syntax and the semantics of ideal scientific languages, a transcendental pragmatics of language concerned with reflection on the subjective-intersubjective conditions of the possibility of linguistically formulated and, as such, intersubjectively valid knowledge.  Here I shall attempt briefly to summarize the main lines of a transcendental semiotics—a transcendental-pragmatic reconstruction and extension of the foundations of the logic of language and science—that I have developed elsewhere.28

The possibility and necessity of a transcendental-pragmatic approach or method of inquiry is, in my opinion, demonstrable in a radical way by reflecting on the conditions of the possibility and the intersubjective validity of logical syntax and semantics themselves.  As C. S. Peirce recognized, it is a logical implication of the three-dimensionality of the sign function, and thereby of sign-mediated knowledge and argumentation, that the intralinguistic (syntactic) sign functions and the reality-related (referential semantic) sign functions presuppose a (pragmatic) interpretation of the signs by a community of interpretation.29  This presupposition obviously also applies to the corresponding semiotic disciplines; logical syntax and semantics are, as abstractive subdisciplines of semiotics, only a means of “indirect” (that is, mediated through the construction of ideal systems of rules) elucidation of scientific-theoretical argumentation.30  Hence, they are in principle dependent upon their extension and integration in a pragmatics of argumentation.  This, however, means that pragmatics is the philosophical discipline that deals with the subjective-intersubjective conditions of understanding meaning and of the formation of consensus in the ideal, unlimited, community of inquirers.  Peirce already essentially conceived of such a semiotic transformation of the Critique of Pure Reason, in the sense of a “normative” semiotic logic of inquiry.31

On the one hand, Morris and Carnap accepted Peirce's foundations of semiotics, in the sense of the three-dimensionality of the sign function (“semiosis”) and of the science of signs (“semiotics”); but—apparently because of the alleged impossibility of a noncontradictory self-reflection on the actual subjective conditions of sign interpretations32—they declared the pragmatic sign dimension to be the object of an empirical (behavioristic) discipline for which, at best, we might supply semantic conceptual explications in the form of a constructive, “pure, theoretical pragmatics.”  Whatever one thinks of the possibility of such a treatment of the pragmatics of language,33 it is certain that the “conventions” that, according to Carnap, underlie the construction of formalizable syntactic-semantic systems of rules—and, to that extent, also underlie the construction of semantic explications of empirical-pragmatic concepts—cannot be thematized philosophically in this way.  The normatively relevant conventions, which alone make possible the conceptual explications in a formal language necessary for a theoretical pragmatics, cannot themselves be made the object of such a pragmatics.  Hence, the theoretical pragmatics that Carnap had in mind—and that he semanticized in a rather a priori fashion—cannot replace the methodological arguments that Popper and Albert find essential.  In view of the contemporary demand for a semiotic transformation of transcendental philosophy, and in view of the fact that the presuppositions of modern constructive theories of language have not been rationally reflected upon, one might characterize the function of transcendental pragmatics for the philosophy of science as having to reflect on the conditions of the possibility and validity of conventions.  A tacit substitute for such reflection within linguistic analysis can be found in Carnap's provisional, ordinary-language “introductions,” which are—because of their use of implicitly self-referential “universally quantified propositions”—strictly speaking, expressed in an officially unlegitimizable “paralanguage.”  Here we find, in my opinion, the heritage of Wittgenstein's image of the ladder in the Tractatus.  The problem for constructive semantics captured in this image cannot be overcome until we accept the transcendental pragmatics of language as an unformalizable fundamental metadiscipline.

In the framework of the present investigation, I would like to support this approach by examining the unavoidable question concerning the conditions of the possibility of intersubjectively valid criticism.  I shall attempt to reconstruct and critically examine Albert's criticism of the classical postulate of sufficient reason from the point of view of transcendental pragmatics.

In this context I would first of all point out that the so-called Münchhausen trilemma facing any philosophical foundations can be logically derived only for sentences of an axiomatized system of propositions, in the sense of the syntactic-semantical construction of a so-called formal language.  That is, such a logical derivation is only possible under prior abstraction from the pragmatic dimension of argumentative language use.  To put it another way, only when one abstracts from the situation of the perceiving and argumentatively engaged subject, who offers his doubts and convictions for discussion in performatively explicable statements, is it possible to characterize the (deductively mediated) appeal to evidence as breaking off the process of giving reasons and to consider this presumed suspension, along with infinite regress and logical circularity, as the third horn of the trilemma.  For only from the viewpoint of syntactic-semantic abstraction, which cannot anchor language and knowledge to the lifeworld through objective or subjective (personal) deixis, can the meaning of the process of giving reasons be understood as a deduction of sentences (about states of affairs) from sentences (about states of affairs) that in principle cannot be broken off.  From the point of view of transcendental pragmatics, the logical process by which sentences are deduced from sentences—indeed, all “axiomatics”—can only be considered as an objectifiable means within the context of the argumentative grounding of statements through epistemic evidence.  (In this sense Aristotle's “apodictic logic” is in fact an “organon” of argumentative discourse—no more, no less.)  That is, the logical deduction of sentences from sentences is not itself the justification of the validity of knowledge—such an absolutization of the logical organon would in fact lead the problem of justification back to the Münchhausen trilemma—but is merely a mediating moment in the argumentative process of giving reasons, a moment that is indeed marked by a priori intersubjective evidence.

Corresponding to this is the following important distinction, which has been characteristically overlooked not only by logical empiricists but also—at least in The Logic of Scientific Discovery—by Popper.  Only when one illegitimately abstracts, in the sense of an “abstractive fallacy,” from the transcendental-pragmatic interpretative function of the subject of knowledge and argumentation, thereby reducing it to an object for empirical psychology, is it possible to maintain that sentences can only by justified by other sentences and that the so-called observation sentences or basic sentences are merely motivated by the experiential evidence of the knowing subject, in the sense of causation.34  Against this the transcendental-pragmatic position takes the point of view of the argumentative knowing subject and attempts, not to explain (from the outside) his “behavior” in formulating sentences, but rather to understand it (from within): hence it must necessarily conceive of epistemic evidence as a reason for formulating observation sentences or basic sentences, although not as a reason from which these sentences might somehow be logically deduced.

It is by no means implied that epistemic evidence—for example, perceptions or ideal (categorical) intuitions—is to be thought of as an unquestionable and sufficient, linguistically independent (that is, prelinguistic and intuitive) basis for the meaning and truth of scientific statements or systems of statements (“theories”).  Such a view corresponds to the modern epistemological (empiricist or intellectualistic) philosophy of primordial origins, which I do not wish to defend, as I have already mentioned.  In my opinion, by virtue of the “propositional acts” (the identifying “acts of reference and predication”)35 upon which the formation of judgments depends, epistemic evidence is interwoven from the outset with language use and the capacities of the knowing subjects—in the sense of the interweaving of knowledge, language use, and activities in quasi-institutionalized “language games” or “forms of life,” as the later Wittgenstein analyzed them.  If knowledge, language use, and so forth were not so interwoven, a child could not learn language or acquire modes of behavior based on an interpretation of experience; that is, one cannot imagine a functioning language game without paradigmatic experiential evidence.  We could not communicate if we did not agree upon common experiential evidence, from which everything must proceed.

From this transcendental-pragmatic interweaving of possible epistemic evidence in language games, it follows, in my opinion, that the justification for the validity of knowledge can be equated neither with the logical deduction of sentences from sentences in axiomatized systems (as modern logic of language, or of science, does) nor with the appeal to nonlinguistic intuitive evidential consciousness (as Cartesian theory of knowledge urges).  Rather, justification, as giving reasons for the validity of knowledge, must always rest on the possible evidential consciousness of the particular knowing subjects (as autonomous representatives of the transcendental knowing subject as such) and on the a priori intersubjective rules of an argumentative discourse in the context of which the epistemic evidence, as subjective proof or objective validity, has to be brought to the level of intersubjective validity.  That this is necessary and also possible is guaranteed by the a priori transcendental-pragmatic “interweaving” of epistemic evidence, whose content is interpretable “as something,” with the rules of language use that Wittgenstein elucidated and that have been concretized and made precise, especially by Austin, Strawson, and Searle, as an interweaving of judgment, reference, and predication in speech acts.  According to this conception, it makes no sense to speak of “appeal to epistemic evidence” without presupposing linguistic discourse as a context for interpretation and logical coherence.  Likewise, it makes no sense to speak of substantial argumentative discourse without presupposing certain epistemic evidence, which the particular participants of discourse apply as their criteria of truth in the argumentative procedure of building a consensus.  This sort of interweaving of epistemic evidence in language games comprises, in my opinion, the transcendental-pragmatic explanation of the fact that all scientific discoveries are, as one says nowadays, “theory laden” and that the epistemic evidence that enters into “basic sentences” is more or less dependent upon those theories that are to be confirmed or falsified, or upon alternative theories.36

Now, one could perhaps take Albert's side and object that our treatment of the problem of philosophical foundations given by epistemic evidence begins with an inadequate, that is to say, already harmless explication of his concepts of “justification” and “evidence.”  One could say that the foundations, in the sense of evidence sought by classical rationalism, could only be absolutely certain or indubitable philosophical foundations.  The methodological search for truth, in the sense of the principle of fallibilism, seems then indeed to be incompatible with the search for evidence, because it could not recognize any final or indubitable certainty.  Let us examine this argument more closely, beginning with Albert's dictum that one “can fundamentally doubt everything.”

4. Philosophical Foundations via Transcendental-Pragmatic Reflection on the Conditions of Possibility of the Intersubjective Validity of Philosophical Argumentation

 

Before I make a final attempt to show the indubitability of certain paradigmatic evidence in the language game of philosophical argumentation, I would like to settle the question of whether, and to what extent, the principle of fallibilism is also to be employed in philosophical argumentation.

First, it should be noted that even logico-mathematical deductions are fallible, trivially, inasmuch as with regard to their pragmatic dimension they are the operations of finite men and thus can go wrong.  In this respect I can gladly concede to critical rationalism that human reason in the psychological sense is always fallible.  The philosopher too can never be certain that he isn't in error.  But this does not mean that it makes sense to assume in either the enterprise of argumentation or that of criticism that one is always in error, or that the use of the concepts “argumentation” and “criticism” could be meaningful without indubitable presuppositions.  More important than the empirical pragmatic concession that even logico-mathematical thought is always fallibilistic is the transcendental-pragmatic insight that the metalogical or metamathematical demonstrability of the absence of contradictions in axiomatic logico-mathematical systems remains in principle incomplete.  Earlier, following Hans Lenk, I allowed this to be one aspect of the Münchhausen trilemma of deductively justified philosophical foundations.  At the same time, however, I pointed out that this does not at all reduce the question of reflexive foundations to absurdity, but rather actually raises it.  In the present context I want to appropriate the insight into the incompleteness of all demonstrations of an absence of contradictions as an aspect of reflexive transcendental-philosophical insight that is, of insight into both the conditions of the possibility and the limits of the objectification of arguments in axiomatized and formalized language systems.

It is difficult to conceive how this insight from the extended critique of reason could be revised in its transcendental-philosophical core.  Nevertheless, one never knows definitively what belongs to the transcendental philosophical core and what belongs to the complex of results that are revisable through advances in metamathematics or metalogic.  To that extent, the transcendental-pragmatic interpretation of the results of metalogic or metamathematics can give an indication of the general problem of transcendental philosophy, whose situation is here somewhat different than in Kant.  The Kantian claim of the definitive completeness of the “system of pure reason” can no longer be sustained; our task is rather that of progressively opening up transcendental horizons, which grow wider with the expansion of the human knowledge that we are questioning as to conditions of possibility.  It in no way follows from this, however, that the principle of fallibilism, and the principle of virtually universal criticism derived from it, could show the absurdity of the postulate of transcendental-philosophical foundations or function as its replacement. 

That this is impossible is shown by the fact that the application of the principle of fallibilism itself leads to something similar to the “liar paradox.”  If the principle of fallibilism is itself fallible, it is just to that extent not fallible, and vice versa.  This application of the critical-rationalist principle of fallibilism to itself can hardly be rejected as meaningless by critical rationalists; for it is precisely they who absolutized the methodological principle of fallibilism beyond its original application to empirical science.  In my opinion, it follows from this, with all the clarity one could wish, that pancritical rationalism represents an untenable standpoint, or at least an exaggeration.  The principle of fallibilism and the principle of criticism derived from it are meaningful and valid only if they are restricted in their validity from the outset, so that at least some philosophical evidence is excluded from possible criticism namely the evidence on which these principles themselves are based.  In this way the transcendental-pragmatic dimension of the noncriticizable conditions of possibility of intersubjectively valid philosophical criticism and self-criticism is brought out in a sufficiently radical way.  What are these conditions?  In this question, I believe, is posed the problem of philosophical foundations.

That the principle of pancritical rationalism does not belong to the uncritical conditions of possibility of philosophical criticism can be seen in the successful self-criticism of pancritical rationalism by its founder, W. W. Bartley.  Bartley found that logic manifestly does “not also belong to that totality. . . which should be subject to proof,” since “the exercise of critical argumentation and logic are inseparably bound together.”51  In critical discussion with Bartley and Albert, Hans Lenk made Bartley's observation more precise.  He stated that “at least some logical rules are fundamentally removed from rational revision.”52  Still more interesting to me is Lenk's remark that the stated rules of some minimal logic are removed a priori from criticism because they are analytically bound to the (idea of the) institution of criticism itself.53  Thus, the rules of a minimal logic are seen as belonging to the paradigmatic evidence of that institution or language game, which can only be disclosed in transcendental pragmatic reflection upon the conditions of the possibility of criticism itself.  I will call this institution the transcendental language game.  Concerning this language game, the previously cited insight of the later Wittgenstein is emphatically valid: this language game as a “system” belongs “to the essence of what we call an argument”: it is, so to speak, “the element in which arguments live.”54  Laying bare this system of argumentation in transcendental pragmatics provides philosophical foundations in a nondeductive manner, since its paradigmatic evidence is precisely of a kind that can neither be called into question by criticism without performative self-contradiction nor be justified deductively without presupposing itself.  The contemporary discussion of the problem of foundations, which is usually oriented toward axiomatic systems of logic, would certainly interpret this situation differently: it would be seen as showing that some evidence—for example, the logic of justification itself—can neither be denied without self-contradiction nor be justified without petitio principii.  Therefore, it is said, ultimate foundations must be superseded by some ultimate decision—somewhat in the sense of the self-confidence of reason as opposed to skepticism (Stegmüller)55 or in the sense of belonging to the institution of critical discussion as opposed to obscurantism (Popper).56  This “solution” to the problem of philosophical foundations clearly corresponds again to the purely logically derived Münchhausen trilemma in Albert's sense, if one disregards the fact that Stegmüller understands “appeal to evidence” not as “appeal to dogma” but rather as a necessity of all philosophizing that cannot be denied without self-contradiction, but that cannot be logically demonstrated without a petitio principii.

In light of our transcendental-pragmatic reflection, however, the problem as presented by these philosophers is the result of absolutizing the objectivization and externalization of argumentation that is presupposed by the axiomatic method—that is, the “estrangement” of arguments into syntactic-semantically interpreted sentences and systems of sentences.  The analysis of such sentences abstracts from the transcendental-pragmatic dimension of the self-reflection of the arguing subject.  Under this abstractive presupposition all paradigmatic evidence of the transcendental language game (such as, for instance, the validity of a minimal logic) must, of course, have the status of unprovable presuppositions of any proof.  And the attempt to justify the necessity of such presuppositions now must look like some bad sophistic attempt at a proof by begging the question; for on the abstract level of an axiomatized sentence system there is no difference between arbitrarily chosen presuppositions and presuppositions that one must presuppose in all possible proofs because one cannot deny then without actual self-contradiction.  Thus philosophy seems doomed to resignation in regard to the problem of foundations.  As Bar-Hillel argues, the logical semantics of sentences and sentence systems can only indirectly clarify argumentation in ordinary language, which is pragmatically integrated in principle; this sort of clarification is based on an abstraction from the pragmatic dimension that has to be overcome if the significance of axiomatic systems is to be brought to bear in the context of argumentation.57  Therefore, the reduction of the meaning of philosophical foundations to the deduction of sentences from sentences (or to the metalogical proof of an absence of contradictions in certain sentence systems) appears to me to be an illegitimate reduction resting on an “abstractive fallacy” that pervades recent, purely syntactic-semantically oriented logic of scientific inquiry.  When this logic is absolutized into a philosophy of argumentation, it commits an abstractive fallacy; it banishes to the domain of empirical psychology the pragmatic dimension of argumentation that cannot be objectivized and formalized (for instance, the self-reflection of participants in argumentation as expressed in performative acts of asserting).  The discussion of the impossibility of providing philosophical foundations rests on a confusion between argumentation as originally related to the dialogic situation of assertion and refutation—which was for Socrates the basis of philosophizing—and Aristotle's apodictic science, which, however, could only be an organon of argumentation purified of all possible pragmatic intrusions.58   

If, however, this abstractive fallacy is reversed by admitting transcendental-pragmatic reflection upon the subjective-intersubjective conditions of the possibility of intersubjectively valid argumentation, then the problem of philosophical foundations appears in a completely different light.  The insight that certain evidence cannot be deductively grounded without presupposing itself (for example, the paradigmatic evidence of a minimal logic in the framework of an as yet unclarified transcendental language game) is no longer a proof of the impossibility in principle of philosophical foundations but rather a reflexive, transcendental-pragmatic insight into the uncriticizable foundation of argumentation itself.  If, on the one hand, a presupposition cannot be challenged in argumentation without actual performative self-contradiction, and if, on the other hand, it cannot be deductively grounded without formal-logical petitio principii, then it belongs to those transcendental-pragmatic presuppositions of argumentation that one must always (already) have accepted, if the language game of argumentation is to be meaningful.  One can, therefore, also call this a transcendental-pragmatic argument for foundations on the basis of critical arguments concerning the meaningfulness of certain practices.

As far as I can see, this reflexive transcendental-pragmatic argument for philosophical foundations is confirmed by a critical yet affirmative reconstruction of the argument of Cartesian doubt.  In this way it can be shown, for example, that Descartes unreflectively undermines the possible significance of the language game he uses when he grants, in the course of his methodological doubt, that in the end all that is supposed to be real might be merely his dream, viz., merely in consciousness.  If all that is supposed to be real is merely a dream, then precisely the critical significance of the expression “merely a dream” (or “merely in consciousness”) cannot be maintained, since it presupposes as paradigmatic evidence that all is not merely a dream (or merely in consciousness).  However, this pseudo-argument, which manifestly rests upon Descartes's illegitimate abstraction of the methodical-solipsistic search for evidence from the a priori of the language game of argumentation, can be revised, as it was by Peirce and Popper, into a virtually universal doubt (viz., the principle of fallibilism).  If one undertakes this correction, then the proper significance of the Cartesian doubt is revealed, in that the certainty of the “dubito, cogito, ergo sum” can also not be doubted in the sense of the virtually universal doubt of all that is supposed to be real. What is the basis for the certainty of the “cogito, ergo sum”?

It cannot rest upon the fact that (in the sense of logical semantics) a syllogistic inference is made from thinking to the existence of that which thinks, as Hintikka showed in 1963, using the conceptual apparatus of Austin's speech act theory.59  Descartes himself repeatedly denied that the cogito was based on such an inference.  Hintikka, however, explicitly states the reason why such an interpretation is inadmissible: in the use of a syllogistic inference from thinking to the existence of that which thinks, the existence of the thinking being must be tacitly presupposed in order to reject the thinking of a fictitious person (say, Hamlet) as irrelevant.  In other words, the certainty of the “cogito, ergo sum” cannot be logically demonstrated in any direct way.  In this sense Descartes does not supply any philosophical foundations that could be affirmatively reconstructed.  That the same person who thinks also exists is, from the viewpoint of formal logic, a claim that, in the sense of the Stegmüllerian dilemma, can be neither denied without self-contradiction nor demonstrated without petitio principii; for it cannot be made in the case of a fictitious person such as Hamlet, but rather only in the case of an existing thinker.  For just that reason, however, the certainty of the “ego cogito, ergo sum” is a transcendental-pragmatic condition of the possibility of the language game of argumentation in our sense.  How can this be shown?  As Hintikka demonstrates, that my doubting or thinking guarantees my existence rests upon the fact that when I perform the act of doubting my existence—an act that is explicitly expressed in the sentence “I doubt herewith, now, that I exist”—I refute the sense of that very sentence for myself and, virtually, for every dialogue partner.60  In other words, the propositional component contradicts the performative component of the speech act expressed by that selfreferential sentence.  The irrefutable certainty of the “cogito, ergo sum” thus rests not on an axiomatically objectifiable deductive relation between sentences, but rather on a transcendental-pragmatic reflexive insight mediated by the actual self-reflexivity of the act of thinking or speaking.

Hintikka remarks in addition that not only is the assertion “I do not exist” refuted by the thought or speech act that is its performance, but this is also true of the assertion “You do not exist.”  I would explain this as follows: Someone who used such an expression in, say, an exorcism aimed at a ghostly apparition would in truth not be denying existence to an object by means of an act of predication; rather, he would be canceling the expression of address, that is, he would be reflexively designating his communicative act as failed.  I prefer to see in this an indication that the irrefutable certainty of the “ego cogito, ergo sum” does not rest upon the primacy of “inner experience,” the “introspection” of an in principle solitary consciousness, as is assumed in the Cartesian theory of “evidence,” right up to Franz Brentano; rather, it rests upon the primacy of an experience of the situation that is simultaneously communicative and reflexive, an experience in which actual self-understanding (and with it ego-consciousness) and understanding the existence of the other are equiprimordial—as is convincingly maintained by Mead and Heidegger.  Confirmation of personal existence in the performatively understood “ego cogito, ergo sum” is only possible as an understanding with oneself about oneself, and that is to say, as part of a virtually public discussion—more precisely, as the deficient mode of such a discussion in which I am the other for myself.  It is precisely this virtual publicity that is attested to in the fact that reflexive self-certainty can be made explicit with the help of a performative speech act.

Therefore, the certainty of the “cogito, sum” is not, as Husserl would have it in Cartesian Meditations, to be understood in such a way that it cannot be formulated in the “communicative plural.”61  In such an epoche of “methodological solipsism,” in which the existence of other subjects is bracketed along with the real world, the evidence of Cartesian insight could in principle not be formulated in the sense of an intersubjectively valid philosophical judgment.  Everyone of us can see, with subjective evidence and with an a priori intersubjective claim to validity, that he cannot doubt the existence of his own ego without actual self-contradiction.62  Unless Husserl could somehow formulate this statement in the “communicative plural,” he could not bring to our knowledge the results of his transcendental reduction or epoche—that is, the insight, to which he gives the status of certainty, into the irreducibility of the sphere of the pure noetic-intentional, meaning-constitutive ego and its noematic correlates.  This can be applied even more radically: Like Descartes, Husserl could not even bring to his own consciousness the indubitability of his ego-consciousness, in a form both intelligible and valid for him, unless he could formulate this insight as an argument in the framework of a transcendental language game of an ideal communication community.  To sum up: Along with ego-consciousness, a language game is presupposed as the fundamentum inconcussum in the sense of the critically reconstructed and transformed Cartesian tradition of philosophical foundations.  In this language game the existence of a real lifeworld and the existence of a communication community are presupposed along with the actual evidence of thinking myself as existing in the sense of paradigmatic language-game evidence.  For it is of prime importance that the Cartesian insight (solitary as it actually is) must be capable of being reexamined and, in this case, also capable of being confirmed by a communication community that is in principle indefinite.  This transcendental-pragmatic version of the Cartesian insight could be valid, in principle, in the form of an a priori certain and at the same time a priori intersubjectively valid judgment even for a man who happened to be the last representative of the communication community and thus was alone in an empirical sense.  Even this man would have to presuppose (1) that there must have been a real communication community and (2) that there might be an unlimited ideal communication community, both capable in principle of confirming his certain insight.63  

From this I conclude that the “vital element” of philosophical arguments is a transcendental language game in which, along with some rules of logic and the existence of a real world, something like the transcendental-pragmatic rules or norms of ideal communication are presupposed.  The individual can secure a priori certainty in the solitary thought of his existence only by appealing to this transcendental language game and its rules. This means, however, that the individual cannot step into or out of the “institution” of this transcendental language game of critical argumentation in the same way we suppose he can in the case of empirical “language games” and “institutions” as “forms of life” (Wittgenstein).64   Rather, as a successfully socialized homo sapiens with “communicative competence,”65 he is necessarily constituted as a being who has identified himself with the ideal communication community in the indicated sense and who has also implicitly accepted the transcendental-pragmatic rules of communication as ethically relevant norms.  This is not contradicted by our capacity to bring to consciousness the discrepancy between the normative ideal of the ideal communication community and real situations of discussion.  It seems to me that this suggests instead the possibility of finding the presuppositions for a transcendental-pragmatic grounding of ethics in the a priori of communication presupposed by rational argumentation—more precisely, in the contradiction (which cannot be resolved by formal logical means) between the presupposition of a real communication community (including our real selves) and the situation of an ideal communication community that is necessarily “counterfactually anticipated” in that presupposition.66  To that extent, the “institution” of the transcendental language game turns out to be rather different from the conventionally based institutions of empirically describable “language games” or “forms of life,” in Wittgenstein's sense.67  More accurately, the former institution could be characterized as the meta-institution of all possible human institutions,68 since it involves the conditions of the possibility of transparent and rational conventions (“agreements”).  Man can withdraw from this institution only at the price of losing the possibility of identifying himself as a meaningfully acting being—for instance, in suicide from existential despair or in the pathological process of paranoid-autistic loss of self.

Therefore—to draw the final conclusion—one cannot choose this rational form of life in an “irrational choice,” as Popper would have it,69 since any choice that could be understood as meaningful already presupposes the transcendental language game as its condition of possibility.  Only under the rational presupposition of intersubjective rules can deciding in the presence of alternatives be understood as meaningful behavior.  From this it does not follow that every decision is rational, but only that a decision in favor of the principle of rational legitimation of the criticism of behavior according to rules is rational a priori.  In that respect the decision in favor of the “framework” of critical argumentation or discussion demanded by Popper can only be understood as an a priori rational and deliberate affirmation of the transcendental language-game rules that are always already implicitly accepted as valid.  Such a decision—which is even to be repeated again and again, particularly in “existential boundary situations” is indeed required in the interest of the realization of reason.70  However, reason in no way needs to replace, through a decision, its rational justification, as is demanded by decisionism.

For it can always confirm its own legitimation through reflection on the fact that it presupposes its own self-understanding of the very rules it opts for.  Popper's assertion that irrationalism can be defended without self-contradiction because one can refuse to accept the argument71 is simply false, since the defense of irrationalism actually refutes the attempt to refuse to engage in argumentation—it refutes it, that is, through the accompanying performative act.  The effective refusal to engage in rational argumentation (or a corresponding self-understanding) is on the other hand a very much more serious matter than Popper seems to assume; it is an act of self-negation and, moreover, of self-destruction, as I have already indicated.72   Even in such a case, however, the person making the decision must himself presuppose the denied principle so long as he understands his own decision as such.  Otherwise, philosophical decisionism (upon which, in the final analysis, Popper's arguments for critical rationalism rest) could not treat the act of denying reason as an intelligible possibility of human choice.

With that I can summarize the issue at stake in this attempt at a metacriticism of critical rationalism.  Critical rationalism cannot, it seems to me, succeed in putting the principle of criticism as such in the place of the principle of philosophical foundations, because its criticism of this principle—like every meaningful criticism—itself needs justification.  Justification of the principle of criticism is, however, possible if and only if the principle is not absolute—if and only if it is restricted by the principle of the self-justification of critical reason through transcendental reflection upon the conditions of its own possibility.73 The point of philosophical foundations lies, then, in the reflexive—transcendental-pragmatic and not deductive argument that one can discursively or practically decide neither for nor against the rules of the transcendental language game without these rules being presupposed.

3. Does the Principle of Fallibilism Contradict the Presupposition of Indubitable Evidence? 

The principle of fallibilism, to my knowledge first put forward by C. S. Peirce, represents an indispensable presupposition in the methodology of empirical science.37  It is this presupposition that distinguishes empirical science from the philosophical science of German Idealism, from philosophical science in the sense of Plato, or even Husserl, from a science justified by essential insight and seeking “episteme.”  But does not this distinction—as well as Albert's claimed insight into the difference between the search for evidence and the search for truth (or between criticism and justificatory rationalism) presuppose in turn a certain evidential, essential insight in the sense of philosophical knowledge?

I do not want to claim that this rhetorical question contains a definitive counterargument against Bartley's pancritical rationalism; rather, I am willing to grant that the principle of fallibilism—in a sense to be explained later—is to be applied even with regard to the insights of the formal sciences (logic and mathematics) and transcendental philosophy.  In compensation for this admission, I would like to claim—also in a sense to be explained later—that evidence in the sense of indubitable certainty is methodologically indispensable for the empirical sciences as well.  I want to clarify the significance of my claims through a discussion of Albert's dictum that one “can fundamentally doubt everything.”37  The difficulty in this sentence, a sentence often casually pronounced by philosophers, is indicated by the historically remarkable circumstance that the founder of “fallibilism,” Peirce, polemicized against Descartes with the argument that one could not doubt everything, if the doubt was not to amount to a contentless “paper doubt.”39  In empirical science a meaningful doubt presupposes, according to Peirce, that one does not doubt everything but rather proceeds from convictions that are taken as certain and assumed to be the standard both of what is to be doubted and of the new evidence considered possible in principle.

Quite similar arguments concerning the meaningfulness of doubting can be found in the later Wittgenstein.40  We find in On Certainty, section 115, “Anyone who wanted to doubt everything would not get even as far as doubting.  The game of doubt itself presupposes certainty.”  In other words, doubt and thereby also criticism in Popper's and Albert's sense—is not explicable as a meaningful language game without in principle presupposing at the same time indubitable certainty.  Wittgenstein generalized and radicalized this insight still further in section 114: “Whoever is certain about no facts, also cannot be certain of the meaning of his words.”41  In other words, every functioning language game (all agreement on meaning) presupposes that the communication partners, who must have learned the language at the same time as they acquired a well-established orientation toward the world, take numerous facts to be certain.  In a real sense, convictions (be they principles or contingent facts) that are neither to be doubted nor to be changed function as “models” or “paradigms” of meaningful use.42  Thus, the conviction that the earth is a sphere that rotates on its axis and revolves around the sun is a “paradigm” for possible meaningful questions in, say, the language game of aeronautics and meteorology.  The conviction that there is a real external world, “outside” of consciousness, is a “paradigm” for the language of critically questioning whether something is real or is only based on delusion, illusion, hallucination, or something similar.

It seems to follow from this that argumentation in everyday life and science must have recourse to evidence that is presupposed in the appropriate language game.  Thus, “appeal to evidence” cannot, at least in this sense, be equated with “appeal to dogma” or “appeal to an arbitrary decision,” since criticism itself—as meaningful criticism in the framework of a language game—must be justified, at least virtually; that is, it too must in principle be based on “evidence.”  To put it differently, criticism cannot somehow—as it appeared to Bartley and Albert—be made into a self-sufficient, ultimate stage of rational argumentation; criticism presupposes a transcendental-pragmatic framework (a meaningful language game) in which various possible attempts at justification and various possible critical arguments correspond to each other, at least in principle, through common appeal to “paradigmatic” evidence.  This analysis reveals the essential structure of the institution of argumentation.  Wittgenstein had something like this in mind when he wrote, “All examination, all weakening and strengthening of any claim whatsoever, occurs within a system.  And such a system is not a more or less arbitrary and doubtful starting point of all our arguments, rather it belongs to the very essence of what we call an argument.  This system is not so much a point of departure as it is the element in which arguments live.”43

In light of the kind of argument about the meaningfulness of doubt that Peirce and Wittgenstein advanced, numerous imprudent or exaggerated claims of Bartley's and Albert's “pancritical rationalism” prove to be untenable.  The simple equation of sufficient grounding through a return to evidence with appeal to a dogma or an arbitrary decision, and the proposal to put “the idea of a critical examination in the place of the idea of justification,” are two such claims.  In fact, the language of the critical rationalists suggests, not infrequently, the misunderstanding of an anarchic criticism for criticism's sake, a critical reason without standards of criticism.

The discussion does not end here, since the point of critical rationalism does not yet seem to be fully grasped.  It is now necessary to clarify the meaning of the principle of fallibilism, as formulated by Peirce.

In his discussion of Descartes, Peirce showed that one cannot doubt everything at once—say, the existence of a real outside world in toto;44 rather, one can doubt virtually anything that is held to be certain—for instance, under the proper circumstances one might doubt the reality of each and every fact that is thought to pertain to the world outside of consciousness.  This virtually universal doubt, for Peirce identical with the principle of fallibilism, also appears to be Albert's target when he writes, “A consistent criticism, which does not allow any dogma, necessarily involves a fallibilism with regard to every possible stage,” and “There is neither a solution of the problem nor an appropriate stage for the solution of certain problems, which must necessarily and from the start elude criticism.”45

But how is this fallibilism reconcilable with Peirce's and Wittgenstein's critical arguments about meaningfulness, according to which every doubt and every criticism must in principle (that is, as a constituent of a meaningful scientific argumentation game) be justified through what is presupposed as indubitable evidence?

Peirce himself found it difficult to reconcile his fallibilism with his notion of certainty within pragmatism, in the sense of “critical common sense”; and he did not, I think, satisfactorily resolve this problem.46  It seems to me that the two Peircian principles can be considered consistent if and only if a distinction is made between the level of reflection of prescientific and scientific language games, on the one hand, and the level of transcendental-pragmatic reflection on the structure of language games in general, on the other. (In my opinion, this is not a question of an arbitrarily repeatable distinction between levels of reflection in the sense of psychology, or even of the formal hierarchy of metalanguages in metalogic; it is rather a distinction that should unequivocally distinguish the implicitly self-referential claim to universality of philosophical statements from the individual or empirically general claims to validity of non philosophical statements.)47  

From the standpoint of philosophical reflection it may be said with regard to every language game, including the philosophical language game, that within its framework doubt and criticism are meaningful only under the presupposition that they can be sufficiently grounded by appeal to indubitable paradigmatic evidence.  At the same time, it is also possible on this level of reflection to formulate a fallibilistic proviso, as a virtually universal doubt with regard to the paradigmatic evidence of all possible language games, except for the philosophical language game of doubt.  Naturally, with this doubt all corresponding language games are made virtually nonfunctional (in the thought experiment to that effect).  This is the case because every language game stands or falls (according to an insight of Wittgenstein later taken up by Thomas Kuhn in his analysis of “scientific revolutions”) with paradigmatic evidence.  Nevertheless, this virtually universal, metascientific doubt is not a “paper doubt” in Peirce's sense.  This is because the fallibilistic proviso does not claim to doubt a statement of empirical science for empirical reasons, but only opens, or holds open, the possibility of doing so.  Merely opening or holding open the possibility of justified doubt—that is, of justified criticism—on the level of metascientific reflection is not contentless inasmuch as it justifies the methodological postulate of the virtually universal attempt at well-justified criticism.

It may well be said that this argument covers the relevant meaning of “fallibilism” in the sense of Peirce and Popper, who made it a principle of the philosophy of science.  At the same time, however, my argument is consistent with the transcendental-pragmatic insight of Peirce and Wittgenstein to the effect that doubt and criticism within the framework of the game of argumentation always presuppose justification by actually indubitable evidence (and by the expectation of possible evidence!) as the condition of their possibility.  We must, however, inquire into the reason why the principle of fallibilism, in the sense of a principle of virtually universal criticism, and the principle of sufficiently grounding doubt and criticism through appeal to evidence can be consistent.  It is not at all self-evident, but rather, philosophically remarkable that on the one hand, any evidence at the basis of a scientific theory must in principle be open to doubt and criticism, while on the other hand, criticism must be sufficiently justified, in the sense that all doubt and criticism must end with appeal to indubitable evidence.  A satisfactory answer to this question, in my opinion, requires no more and no less than an appropriate transcendental-pragmatic distinction and mediation between the epistemological philosophy of ultimate origins and the twentieth-century philosophy of linguistic analysis.

This much seems clear to me: If the modern epistemological version of the philosophy of ultimate origins (whether in the form of empiricism or of rationalism) is correct in its claim to have reduced the intersubjective validity of knowledge to (“my”) evidential consciousness, then it can hardly be understood how certain convictions may be doubted or criticized at all.  If, on the other hand, the logic of science (oriented to the semantic analysis of sentences) is correct in its presupposition that sentences can only be justified by other sentences, while extralinguistic evidence of consciousness may only be considered as the source of external causal motives for the conventional formation of “basic statements,” then it is inexplicable that criticism always presupposes possible justification by evidence.  A resolution of this dilemma is, in my opinion, possible with the (transcendental-pragmatic) presupposition that evidential consciousness and intersubjective validity of linguistically formulated arguments are, on the one hand, irreducible aspects of the idea of truth and, on the other hand, always, as such, peculiarly interwoven with each other in language games.

This argument has two consequences.  First, contrary to the view of the modern theory of knowledge from Descartes to Husserl, evidential consciousness for me (be it evidence in the sense of empirical perception or in the sense of ideal or categorical intuition) cannot in principle be equated with the intersubjective validity of arguments.  The reason for this lies in the mediating function of language, conceived as the transcendental condition of the possibility of an intersubjectively valid interpretation of the world, a function overlooked from Descartes to Husserl.  It seems to be a consequence of this mediating function that, to the extent that perceptual judgments possess a communicable objective content, in the form of an assertion that interpretively transcends the subjective sense data supporting them, they underlie any possible criticism: criticism now means nothing other than a possible reinterpretation of the perceptual evidence, which is itself indubitable.  Kant postulated prelinguistic forms of connection and schemata of “consciousness in general” to account for the objectivity and intersubjectivity of “experiential judgments” that a priori transcend merely subjective perceptual evidence; and the modern “genetic epistemology” of Piaget appears to confirm this postulate by means of empirical psychology.  It must be pointed out, however, that the prelinguistic conditions of consciousness postulated by Kant as conditions of the possibility of the intersubjective validity of knowledge are not, as Kant himself knew, sufficient conditions for the intersubjective validity of the empirical knowledge of science; further conditions are necessary to account for the validity of the empirical propositions of science.  In addition, from the viewpoint of a transcendental pragmatics of language, it must be supposed that even synthetic a priori statements, which for Kant and Husserl were also certain a priori (for instance, the axioms of Euclidian geometry or the Husserlian statements concerning the simultaneity of color and extension), can be given the status of intersubjectively valid principles of science only insofar as such statements, on the basis of tacit conventions, function as paradigmatic evidence for argumentation in specific language games.

By means of this distinction and connection between the epistemological and the linguistic-pragmatic viewpoints, it becomes possible to explain why the so-called crisis of modern physics could question the intersubjective validity of the theoretical principles of classical physics on the basis of a reinterpretation of experience through explanatorily more powerful theories—and could do so despite the recognition of certain a priori evident connections between representations, as subjective conditions of the possibility of primary experience (for instance, conceptual connections in the sense of Kant's “forms of intuition” and “schematized categories”).  In my opinion, the transcendental pragmatics of language lead here to a conclusion that is contrary to the theory of evidence: the answer to the question concerning the intersubjective validity of knowledge cannot be given by appealing to epistemic evidence for the individual consciousness (or even a priori evidence for “consciousness in general”); rather, intersubjective validity requires postulating a consensus that is to be reached through argumentative discourse in the community of inquirers (Peirce, Royce).48  

This discussion of raising evidential consciousness to the level of paradigmatic evidence for language games shows, on the other hand, that the procedure of arriving at a consensus on the basis of argumentative discourse in the community of inquirers can in no way be understood without taking into account the appeal to epistemic evidence clarified by epistemology.  Thus it is clear, for example, that the reinterpretations of our primary experience by means of explanatorily more powerful physical theories must in turn be sufficiently justified by appealing to evidence that is paradigmatic for these language games.  As is the case with such scientific theories, this evidence need not have the character of direct, clear evidence of primary experience.  Thus, for example, in the case of the Riemannian space presupposed by the general theory of relativity, one presupposes public paradigmatic evidence for a language game that is not evidence in the sense of ideal perceptual space.  In this case, however, the empirical verification of the physical theory is carried out by means of measuring instruments, which for their part, in both their function and their manufacture, presuppose evidence in the sense of the perception of ideal space, which is paradigmatic in the “protophysical” language game of Euclidian geometry.  This example, I believe, elucidates the a priori necessary connection between argumentation related to discourse and (sufficient justification by means of) appeal to epistemic evidence—a connection that is not considered in the semantically oriented logic of science.  Although the evidential consciousness that is always mine does not guarantee the intersubjective validity of knowledge, still the argumentative redemption of claims to validity in a scientific language game must refer back ultimately to that evidence which can, in principle, ultimately be validated by every single member of the interpretation community in his or her (empirical or a priori) evidential consciousness.

Here, one should particularly note that the paradigmatic evidence, upon which Wittgenstein's criticism and doubt rest in the framework of a language game, is yet not identical with the originally experienced epistemic evidence, but rather, can and must directly refer back to conventions.  Indeed, Wittgensteinian objections to Kant and Husserl are correct: without the mediation of such conventions, epistemic evidence could not function as paradigmatic evidence for language games.  The conventions of paradigmatic evidence as such, however, can in no way be traced back to an arbitrary decision; rather, as evidence presented in argumentation, they must be justified, however indirectly—for example, in the empirical verification of theories that they support—by reference to that original (empirical or a priori) evidential consciousness, of which they attempt to give a convincing interpretation.  From the point of view of a transcendental pragmatics of language, the fact that evidential consciousness achieves intersubjective validity only as publicly acknowledged language game paradigms shows that giving reasons in arguments necessarily leads back to appeals to epistemic evidence.

It is not yet clear, however, how the transcendental-pragmatic mediation between the philosophy of consciousness and analytic philosophy of language yields an argument in favor of philosophical foundations.  Indeed, the metascientific grounding of the principle of fallibilism appears to have shown that all indubitable epistemic evidence must be looked upon as relative to certain language games that can in principle be transcended by means of critical reflection.  Thus, it appears that at the philosophical level of a reflection upon validity, the principle of (progressive) criticism does have priority over the principle of sufficient justification through appeal to evidence.  The evidence presupposed in special argumentative language games is to be considered in principle revisable, while permanent criticism, which may presuppose in every particular context an appeal to evidence, retains, it seems, the last word on the level of philosophical reflection, which transcends all particular language games.

At this point we should recall that the reason why criticism appears to retain the last word on the (metascientific) level of philosophical reflection is that there exists a philosophical language game in which the scope of all language games can from the outset be discussed, and with a claim to universal validity.  (Wittgenstein sought to minimize this claim through the notion of simple family “resemblances” among [language] “games”;49 and the main line of analytic philosophy of science, including Russell, Carnap, and Tarski, objected to the implicit self-referentiality of the universal validity claim of philosophical discourse—although since Russell's theory of types these objections could themselves be articulated with universal validity only at the cost of self-contradiction.)50  With regard to the critical rationalism of Popper, however, it is indisputable that he can justify his claim to replace the postulate of sufficient reason by means of principle of criticism only by making a universal a priori validity claim in philosophical argumentation.

Here, however, we immediately face the prospect of a new problem of justification, involving an appeal to evidence that cannot be doubted and criticized—at least not in the same way as the paradigmatic evidence of those language games that could be seen by philosophy as revisable and to that extent could be transcended.  Corresponding to the reasons that seemed to speak for the final priority of criticism—that is, to the fact that philosophical reflection can and must consider all paradigmatic evidence as in principle revisable—we now have the fact that the philosophical language game itself must be able to appeal to evidence that in principle is not identical with any of the empirically revisable language game paradigms.  In this way we can argue for the priority of philosophical foundations over the principle of permanent criticism.

 

Notes


Notes

1. H. Albert, Traktat über kritische Vernunft (Tübingen, 1968, 1969), p. 15. English translation: Treatise on Critical Reason (Princeton, 1985), p. 14. All citations of Albert are according to the English translation.

2. W. W. Bartley, The Retreat from Commitment (Lasalle, 1984).

3. Albert, p. 18.

4. Albert, p. 18.

5. Cf. Albert, p. 12, as well as pp. 13-38.

6. Albert, p. 19.

7. Albert, p. 19.

8. Albert, p. 40.

9. Albert, pp. 44, 46-47.

10. Albert, pp. 46-47.

11. Albert, p. 49ff.

12. Cf. Albert, p. 72ff.

13. Aristotle's justification of the principle of noncontradiction can serve as an illustration of the classical problem of ultimate foundations.  After Aristotle first explains the nature of the so-called axioms of the mathematicians and then presents the principle of noncontradiction as an example of an axiom, he continues:

Some indeed demand that even this shall be demonstrated, but this they do through want of education, for not to know of what things one should demand demonstration, and of what one should not, argues want of education.  For it is impossible that there should be demonstration of absolutely everything (there would be an infinite regress, so that there would still be no demonstration); . . . We can, however, demonstrate negatively even that this view is impossible, if our opponent will only say something; and if he says nothing it is absurd to seek to give an account of our views to one who cannot give an account of anything, insofar as he cannot do so.  For such a man, as such, is from the start no better than a vegetable. Now negative demonstration I distinguish from demonstration proper, because in a demonstration one might be thought to be begging the question, but if another person is responsible for the assumption we shall have negative proof, not demonstration.

Aristotle, Metaphysics, trans. Arthur Platt, McKean ed. (New York, 1941), bk. 4, 10006a6-18.

14. Albert, p. 17.

15. Cf. Aristotle, Anal. Post. I, 2, 71b20ff.

16. To speak more precisely, Descartes ranks evidence (in the sense of “clara et distincta perceptio”) above truth (in the sense of the ontological correspondence between thoughts and states of affairs) and in this way raises self-consciousness, as certain of its own being, to the “first principle” of his philosophy.  Under the axioms that are grounded in clear and distinct ideas, Descartes first mentions the sentence, “All that is has a cause or a reason.” (Cf., for example, Principia I, 11.52, and Oeuvres, Adami Tannery ed., 7, 112, 135ff., and 164).

17. Albert, pp. 12-13ff.

18. Cf. Albert, p. 16.

19. Cf. Albert, p. 18.

20. Cf. Hans Lenk, “Philosophische Logikbegründung und rationaler Kritizismus,” in Metalogik und Sprachanalyse (Freiburg, 1973), pp. 88-109.

21. Under this title T. W. Adorno distances himself from the same type of modern theory of knowledge that Albert rejects.

22. Albert, p. 30.

23. The absolute necessity of linguistic argumentation is correctly emphasized by Popper, for instance, in his arguments against the intuitionist grounding of mathematics in a theory of evidence.  According to Popper, only argumentation can ultimately give rise to a decision concerning the validity of mathematical sentences.

As soon as the admissibility of a mathematical construction proposed by intuitionism can be called into question (and, naturally, it can be called into question), language proves to be more than a mere means of communication which would be in principle superfluous.  It proves to be rather an indispensable medium of discussion.

Popper, “Epistemology without a Knowing Subject,” in Proceedings of the Third International Congress for Logic, Methodology, and Philosophy of Science, Rootselaar-Stall ed. (Amsterdam, 1968), p. 360; reprinted in Objective Knowledge (Oxford, 1972), pp. 106-152.

24. Albert, p. 52.

25. Albert, p. 53. 26. Albert, p. .52.

27. Albert, p. 52.

28. Cf. K.-O. Apel, “Programmatische Bemerkungen zur Idee einer transzendentalen Sprachpragmatik,” in Studia Philosophica in Honorem Sven Krohn, ed. Timo Airaksinen et al. (Turku, 1973), pp. 11-36, and also in Semantics and Communication, ed. C. H. Heidrich (Amsterdam, London, New York, 1974), p. 79ff.; and cf. “Zur Idee einer transzendentalen Sprachpragmatik,” in Aspekte und Probleme der Sprachphilosophie, ed. J. Simon (Freiburg, 1974). See also my “Sprechakttheorie und transzendentale Pragmatik: zur Frage ethischer Normen,” in Sprachpragmatik und Philosophie, ed. K.-O. Apel (Frankfurt a.M., 1975), pp. 10-173.

29. Cf. my introduction to C. S. Peirce, Schriften II (Frankfurt, 1979). Eng. trans. Charles Sanders Peirce: From Pragmatism to Pragmaticism (Amherst, 1981).

30. Cf. Y. Bar-Hillel, “Argumentation in Pragmatic Languages,” in Aspects of Language, ed. Y. Bar-Hillel (Jerusalem, 1970), p. 208ff.

31. Cf. my essay. “Von Kant zu Peirce: die semiotische Transformation der transzendentalen Logik,” in Transformation der Philosophie, K.-O. Apel (Frankfurt, 1972), vol. 2, p. 157ff. Eng. trans. “From Kant to Peirce: The Semiotical Transformaton of Transcendental Logic,” in Kant's Theory of Knowledge, ed. L. W. Beck (Dordrecht, Boston, 1974).

32. Cf., for example, C. W. Morris, Writings on the General Theory of Signs (The Hague, 1971), p. 46ff. and p. 56ff.

33. Cf. my critical introduction to C. Morris's Zeichen, Sprache und Verhalten (Dusseldorf, 1973).

34. As Popper wrote in The Logic of Scientific Discovery (London, 1959), p. 105, “Experiences can motivate a decision, and hence an acceptance or a rejection of a statement, but a basic statement cannot be justified by them—no more than by thumping on the table.”  Popper even speaks alternately of a motivational and a causal relation (cf. P. Bernays, “Reflections on Karl Popper's Epistemology,” in The Critical Approach to Science and Philosophy, Essays in Honor of Karl Popper [London, 1964], p. 38).  Albrecht Wellmer correctly remarks,

The method of linguistic analysis, which Popper holds in low esteem, is not necessary for demonstrating the untenability of the conception of a motivational relation between experience and its linguistic articulation. . . . Popper overlooks the fact that not only experientially based sentences but also experience itself transcends our momentary here and now.

(Methodologie als Erkenntnistheorie. Zur Wissenschaflslehre Karl R. Popper [Frankfurt, 1967], p. 156ff.)  

Like the logical empiricists, Popper is unable to think of a conceptual alternative to the disjunctive logical relation between sentences and empirical-psychological (external-causal) motivational contexts, or between linguistic universals and prelinguistic evidential experiences.  And under this (nominalistic) presupposition, Popper is correct in discarding as psychologism the “protocol sentences” qua “experience protocols” of the neopositivists.  (Cf. The Logic of Scientific Discovery, p. 95ff.)  He leaves himself no alternative but to trace back the validity of the “basic statement” to a “basic decision.”

Suppose, however, that our evident experiences are always linguistically interpreted experiences and as such transcend the momentary here and now.  Then two things follow: first, their evidence, as dependent on interpretation, can never be considered infallible; and second, such evidence can and must function as the internal justification of the meaning content of our linguistically articulated judgments of experience.  One will certainly not appeal to such experiential evidence in the way that a psychologist explains the convictions of a man by means of experiential evidence qua cause.  But one will appeal to it, in argumentation (and also in critical argumentation), as subjective testimony concerning objective evidence.  Popper is unacquainted with this concept of evidence, which is presupposed in transcendental phenomenology.  Rather, he equates (as does logical empiricism, only more consistently as regards the verdict of psychologism) “evidence” in the sense of the theory of knowledge with evidential experience or evidential feeling in the sense of empirical psychology (Popper, p. 46ff. and p. 99ff.)—as if evidence did not also belong to the necessary but not sufficient conditions of the validity of psychological knowledge.  If one reduces the criterion of truth (in the sense of a never infallible indicator) or objective evidence (which, to be sure, must be capable of being had by a knowing subject) to the psychological status of a subjective evidential feeling, then it certainly becomes necessary to replace the notion of something being objectively justified with the notion of unlimited testability or criticizability.  But without the presupposition of possible evidence, what meaning does the very idea of testing or criticizing really have?  Reference to the fact that an infinite regress can be avoided in practice by a decision can scarcely be a satisfactory answer to the question concerning the positive meaning of criticism.

35. Cf. John Searle, Speech Acts (Cambridge, ] 969), chap. 2.

36. I cannot here go into the consequences that, in the philosophy of science, result from the notion of the interweaving of evidence in language games.  Suffice it to say that experiential evidence can no more be seen as an interpretation-free basis for the intersubjective validity of knowledge than its being interwoven in language games can be understood as clear dependence on theoretically precise language use. Such a consequence—drawn by followers of Kuhn, particularly Feyerabend—leads to a relativism of language games or of theories, which Popper has correctly characterized as the “myth of the frameworks.”  Not only are there “language games,” but also, within all such language games, there is the transcendental language game of the unlimited communication community.

37. Cf. my edition of C. S. Peirce, Schriften I und II (Frankfurt, 1967 and 1970), subject index.

38. Albert, p. 14.

39. C. S. Peirce, Collected Papers, 5 (Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1933), §§ 265 and 376.

40. For steering me to the following Wittgenstein references, I am particularly indebted to an unpublished paper by Dieter Mans.

41. L. Wittgenstein, On Certainty (New York, 1969), p. 114.

42. Cf., for example, L. Wittgenstein, Philosophical Investigations (New York: Macmillan, 1958; trans. Anscombe), § 50:

There is one thing of which one can say neither that it is one meter long nor that it is not one meter long, and that is the standard meter in Paris.  But this is, of course, not to ascribe any extraordinary propertv to it, but only to mark its peculiar role in the language game of measuring with a meter rule.  Let us imagine samples of color being preserved in Paris like the standard meter.  We define: “sepia” means the color of the standard sepia which is kept there hermetically sealed. . . . We can put it like this: This sample is an instrument of the language used in ascriptions of color. . . . What looks as if it had to exist is part of the language.  It is a paradigm in our language game; something with which comparison is made.

In addition, § 300:

It is—we should like to say—not merely the picture of the behavior that plays a part in the language game with the words “he is in pain,” but also the picture of the pain.  Or, not merely the paradigm of the behavior, but also that of the pain.

With clear reference to a priori certain convictions, is the following in Remarks on the Foundations of Mathematics (Oxford, 1956, p. 30ff; trans. Anscombe):

Whence comes the feeling that “White is lighter than black” expresses something about the essence of the two colors? . . . Is it not like this: the picture of a black and a white patch . . . serves us simultaneously as a paradigm of what we understand by “lighter” and darker and as a paradigm for white and for black . . . . That connection, a connection of the paradigms and the names, is set up in our language.  And our proposition is nontemporal because it only expresses the connection of the words “white,” “black,” and “lighter” with a paradigm.

43. Wittgenstein, On Certainty, § 114.

44. That one cannot meaningfully doubt the real external world in toto can be shown also from the point of view of the later Wittgenstein.  One cannot with Descartes meaningfully argue that all that is supposed to be real is finally merely my dream (or merely in consciousness), since the expression “merely my dream” (or, merely in consciousness) is meaningful only within the framework of a language game in which it is presupposed as paradigmatic that not all that is supposed to be real is merely my dream or merely in consciousness.

45. Albert, p. 47.

46. On this, see my introduction to C. S. Peirce, Schriften I (Frankfurt, 1967), p. 123ff.

47. There can be no theory of reflection that is formalizable in the sense of the analytic logic of science (no “symbolic model” of reflection), as G. Frey has shown in opposition to the call for a total objectification of human consciousness and its corresponding cybernetic simulation.  Cf. G. Frey, Sprache—Ausdruck des Bewusstseins (Stuttgart, 1965), p. 37ff., and “Sind bewusstseinsanaloge Maschinen Möglich?” in Studium Generale, vol. 19 (1966), pp. 191-200.  Just this insight shows that we have transcendental-philosophical knowledge concerning the theoretical distinction between any imaginable level of the metalanguage hierarchy and the level of reflection of philosophical sentences—and this knowledge can be philosophically explicated.  See Theodor Litt's explication of the “self-stratification” of mind and language in Denken und Sein (Stuttgart, 1948).

48. Ct. my essay, “Szientismus oder transzendentale Hermeneutik? Zur Frage nach dem Subjekt der Zeichen-Interpretation in der Semiotik des Pragmatismus,” in Hermeneutik und Dialektik, Festschrift für H. G. Gadamer, vol. I, ed. R. Bubner et al. (Tübingen, 1970), now also in Transformation der Philosophie, K.-O. Apel, vol. 2, pp. 178-219. See Habermas's explication of the “discourse” theory of truth in “Wahrheitstheorien,” in Wirklichkeit und Reflexion, Festschrift für W. Schulz (Pfullinger, 1974), pp. 211-265.  See also my “C. S. Peirce and Post-Tarskian Truth,” in The Relevance of C. S. Peirce (Lasalle, 1983), pp. 189-223.

49. Ct. Wittgenstein, Philosophical Investigations, § 65ff.

50. Cf. Max Planck, “Russell's Philosophv of Language,” in The Philosophy of Bertrand Russell, ed. P. A. Schilpp (Evanston, Illinois, 1944), pp. 227-255, as well as my remarks above concerning “paralinguistic” introductions of a philosophy understood according to the paradigm of constructive semantics.

51. Bartley, p. 146ff.

52. Lenk, p. 105H.

53. Lenk, p. 107ff.

54. Wittgenstein, On Certainty, § 105.

55. W. Stegmüller, Metaphysik, Skepsis, Wissenschaft, 2nd ed. (Heidelberg, New York, 1969), p. 169.

56. K. Popper, The Open Society and Its Enemies (Princeton, 1950), p. 413ff.

57. See note 30, above.

58. An interesting example of the early anticipation of this confusion and of the modern reduction of philosophy to logical semantics is the following text ascribed by the commentator on Aristotle, Ammonius, to Theophrastus:

Since discourse (logos) has a twofold relation. . . one to the listener for whom it has a meaning, the other to the things concerning which the speaker wishes to produce in the listener a conviction, poetics and rhetoric exist with regard to the relation to the listener. . . however, the philosopher will be particularly concerned with the relation of discourse to things, by refuting the false and demonstrating the true.” See Ammonius, Aristotelis De lnterpretatione Commentarium, ed. Busse (Berlin, ] 887), p. 365ff.  The logic of language in logical empiricism has revived this division by putting empirical pragmatics in the place of poetics and rhetoric.  Since, however, modern linguistic analysis was preceded by the transcendental philosophy of the knowing subject, today we should be in a position to see that this division is incomplete with regard to the interpreting subject.  The completion can certainly not be undertaken by a transcendental philosophy of consciousness, which—like Kant—expels linguistic discourse in general into “anthropology from a pragmatic point of view.

59. J. Hintikka, “Cogito, Ergo Sum: Inference or Performance,” Philosophical Review 71 (1962), pp. 3-32.

60. Analogously, Stegmüller shows, by the very performative act through which he claims validity for his thesis “that the problem of evidence is absolutely insoluble” (Stegmüller, p. 168), that the existence of evidence is a necessary condition of the possibility of meaningful argumentation.  Naturally this does not contradict his observation that the existence of evidence cannot be demonstrated (that is, logically deduced) without logical circularity.  But it indicates that the reduction of the problem of justification to the possibility of logical demonstration in the framework of an objectivized syntactic-semantic sentence system amounts to an “abstractive fallacy” when it comes to the problem of philosophical foundations.  For Stegmüller himself, after all, cannot avoid entering the sphere of (transcendental) pragmatics.  He does this when he concludes that the arguing subject, faced with the dilemma that the existence of evidence can be neither denied without self-contradiction nor demonstrated without petitio principii, is compelled to a “prerational decision concerning certainty.”  However, this way of entering into a pragmatic dimension without the aid of transcendental-pragmatic reflection leads him to miss the point that the reflective insight that the existence of evidence is a condition of the possibility of argumentation (which can be neither denied without self-contradiction nor logically demonstrated without petitio principii)—as an insight into the pragmatic situation of argumentation—renders a pre-rational decision in favor of the supposition of evidence completely superfluous.  For, as an insight of transcendental-pragmatic reflection, it is not about some formal-logical dilemma but about an indispensable condition of the possibility of performing the act of arguing.

61. E. Husserl, Cartesian Meditations, trans. D. Cairns (The Hague, 1973), pp. 18-19.

62. One has to observe Husserl's uncertainty in the following formulation (Husserl, pp. 20-2]): “. . . this 'phenomenological epoche' or 'bracketing' of the objective world . . . therefore does not leave us confronting nothing. On the contrary we gain possession of something by it; and what we (or, to speak more precisely, what I, the one who is meditating) acquire by it is my pure living with all the pure subjective processes making this up, and everything meant in them: the universe of 'phenomena' in the phenomenological sense” (italics added, K.-O. A.).

63. When Husserl declares, “By my living, by my experiencing, thinking, valuing, and acting, I can enter no world other than the one that gets its sense and acceptance or status in and from me, myself” (p. 21), he looks through the language (game) presupposed a priori by his thought as through a glass—no differently than did Descartes at the beginning of the epoch of philosophy justifying itself through the evidence of self-consciousness.  Certainly if this whole epoch is rejected as in error because of its reflection upon the subjective conditions of the possibility of epistemic evidence—as has recently been done by Werner Becker, who provides a destruction of the history of transcendental philosophy from the perspective of “critical rationalism” (W. Becker, Selbstbewusstsein und Spekulation. Zur Kritik der Transzendentalphilosophie (Freiburg, 1972)—then, in my opinion, the baby is thrown out with the bath water.  For it is not the will to evidence or the “reflection model” (Becker) that is to be rejected from the standpoint of critical discussion.  What is to be rejected, rather, is the confusion of reflection on validity with genuine knowledge of a special sphere of being (as in both Descartes and Husserl) or with substantive knowledge in general (partially in German Idealism) and the confusion of actual evidence (for my consciousness) with the intersubjective validity of knowledge.  It seems to me, however, that these confusions can be unraveled and avoided through a transcendental pragmatics of language.  For a convincing treatment of the Husserlian aporetic, cf. also H. Rouges, “Evidenz und Solipsismus in Husserls ‘Cartesianischen Meditationen,’” in Philosophische Beziehungswissenschaft, Festschrift für J. Schaaf, eds. W. F. Niebel, D. Leisegang (Frankfurt, 1971).

64. In this regard I have not only to add to Hans Lenk's characterization of the noncriticizable rules of the “institution of rational criticism” but also to “dramatize” them in a transcendental philosophy, to use an expression of H. Albert.  “The rules and the very idea (or institutions)” of rational criticism are, in my opinion, not only “bound together by linguistic convention” (Lenk, p. 108), but linguistic convention is in this case only the “conventional realization” of rules that originally make explicit conventions (“agreements”) possible.  More clearly, the idea and institution of rational criticism is not just a historical form of life among other possible forms of life although in the form familiar to us it was grounded, that is, conventionally realized, for the first time by the Greek philosophers.  It may be that the institution of rational discussion has contributed to the realization of homo sapiens, but obviously it could do this only because it made explicit fundamental conditions of meaningful interaction between men and between forms of life.  In any case, today the situation is such that not only “can the notion of rational criticism not renounce itself” (Lenk, p. 109), but also we cannot renounce it without renouncing ourselves as men in a nonpathological sense.  Naturally, this does not mean that all men must be philosophers (in the academic sense) or even disciples of critical rationalism.

65. Cf. J. Habermas, “Vorbereitende Bemerkungen zu einer Theorie der kommunikativen Kompetenz,” in J. Habermas and N. Luhmann, Theorie der Gesellschaft oder Sozialtechnologie (Frankfurt, 1971), pp. 101-141.

66. For an attempt to carry out this program, cf. my essay “Das Apriori der Kommunikationsgemeinschaft und die Grundlagen der Ethik,” in Transformation der Philosophie, vol. 2, pp. 358-435.  Also see there (p. 397ff.) my objections to Albert's proposal to consider competing systems of morals as empirically falsifiable theories of science.  Such a treatment already presupposes, in fact, an ethical norm.

67. Cf. my essay, “Die Kommunikationsgemeinschaft als transzendentale Voraussetzung der Sozialwissenschaften,” in Transformation der Philosophie, vol. 2, pp. 220-263.

68. Cf. my essay, “Arnold Gehlens ‘Philosophie der Institutionen’ und die Metainstitution der Sprache,” in Transformation der Philosophie, vol. I, pp. 197-221.

69. Cf. note 6, above.

70. To that extent Popper's commitment to the voluntaristic tradition from Duns Scotus to Kant (The Open Society and Its Enemies [Princeton, 1950], p. 780) is justified, but only because the engagement of the will in favor of the realization of reason is not directly synonymous with establishing its reflexive self-justification by means of a decision is tic “Sic volo, sic jubeo; stet pro ratione voluntas.” This viewpoint, however, must, it seems to me, be brought to bear not only against Popper's decisionism but also against Habermas's argument in Legitimation Crisis (Boston, 1975), pp. 158-159.  Indeed, I concur—as I scarcely need to emphasize—wholly and completely with Habermas's theory that we human beings (not only as arguing beings but also as acting beings) have always implicitly recognized the validity of norms of ideal communication through the counterfactual anticipation of an ideal communication situation.  Nevertheless, it seems to me necessary that transcendental reflection on this “fact of reason” be mediated by the reflection of those arguing upon the conditions of the possibility of their practice.  It is only in connection with argumentative discourse that the conditions of possibility of all meaningful action within the framework of language games can be made explicit and distinguished from mere convention.  More importantly, reflection upon those ethical principles we have always necessarily recognized does not remove the necessity of a deliberate affirmation (renewed again and again) of this recognition in the sense of a commitment to the realization of reason.  This demand amounts, in my opinion, not to a “residual decisionism,” as Habermas asserts, but rather to the validation of the indispensable function of good will in the sense of an ethical unity of knowledge and interest.

71. Popper, The Open Society and Its Enemies, p. 780.

72. Decisions against realizing reason do not signify as a rule a denial in principle of the validity of transcendental-pragmatic rules of rational discourse. On the contrary, one claims only to be an exemption—the Devil lives on such things, as it were.

73. That this depends decidedly on following the path of transcendental reflection is indicated, in a very interesting way, by the dilemma of the pure constructivism of the Erlangen School.  Although Paul Lorenzen would like to solve the problem of philosophical foundations by reconstructing Kantian transcendental philosophy, he thinks it necessary to grant that an “act of faith” is its starting point, since “the term ‘justification’ makes sense only after one has accepted. . . principles” (Normative Logics and Ethics [Mannheim/Zurich, 1969], p. 74).  This problematic, however (which bears obvious analogies to that of Popper), occurs, in my opinion, only if one either no longer recognizes transcendental reflection (upon principles that one must necessarily have always accepted) as a legitimate move in the philosophical argumentation game, or simply overlooks this possibility.  This appears to me to be a typical modern conceptual compulsion: One wants to practice Kant's Copernican revolution and, hence, begins immediately with an act of construction.  However, in order to be able to present a logical construction as the reconstruction of our competences, we must first reflect on that which is not capable of being meaningfully questioned, the conditions of the possibility of valid criticism that are implicit in the transcendental language game.  Only this act of transcendental-philosophical reflection saves us from a “framework” relativism grounded in decisionism, on the one hand, and from a naturalistic absolutization of the empirical critique of ideology into a self-reflection as self-unmasking (in the sense of the “nothing but” reductionism of the nineteenth century), on the other hand.  On the distinction between transcendental reflection and critical self-reflection, cf. J. Habermas, “Nachwort” to the paperback edition of Erkenntnis und Interesse (Frankfurt, 1973), p. 411ff.
